
## Tolerances

Intellectual property laws embody an extreme theory of how
to solve the sustainability problem as I've defined it. In a
nutshell, take things that are easy to borrow and reuse from
others, like software and software techniques, and make it
possible to charge for them, by making it possible to sue
for use without permission.  In other words, make paying
people who make software a market problem, like paying iron
miners or factory workers.

The intellectual property approach doesn't say anything
about to how to make the market itself efficient.  And in
fact communicating availability, disseminating price,
negotiating sales, recording transactions, collecting and
paying taxes, and so on, can be painfully slow and
expensive.  More expensive than making some very good
software.  Not conducive to pooling and inspiring dispersed
effort.

Open Source as we know it today embodies an almost totally
contrary theory of sustainability. In a nutshell, open
source takes software the law allows us to keep to ourselves
and charge others for using, and gives everybody a copy and
permission to use it.  In other words, take something that
we're supposed get through the market, like iron and
automobiles, and treat them like sunshine, instead.

This open source approach doesn't say anything about where
developer compensation and motivation are going to come
from.  And in fact learning to program computers,
identifying problems, implementing solutions, refining
approaches, addressing bugs, and helping others use the
results takes a whole lot of time, discipline, and effort.
Time, discipline, and effort that only the most fortunate
among us can do for very long without pay.

Conventional intellectual property thinking tells us that
market mechanisms for paying software people will be
efficient.  Those mechanisms are pretty efficient.  But
their inefficiency is bad enough that marketing costs more
than providing some great software.

Conventional open source software thinking tells us that
people and companies who don't need or care about the
financial cost of making software will provide abundant,
quality, well maintained software for all.  Lots of great
software comes from those folks.  But a lot of great
software never gets made, or isn't open source, because it
takes people and companies who need money to make it.

We see these dynamics play out in open source software every
day.  A great deal of open source comes from students,
hobbyists, and free time.  And a great deal of open source
comes from large corporations, who have the financial or
strategic flexibility not to care whether or how the cost of
making it comes back.  As a young programmer, you start a
project that catches on, and find yourself holding a job
offer to come work for a big company.  As a large
corporation, you release a large, stable project as open
source, so you can start receiving bug reports from others
who don't want or expect any compensation for their work.

In between, things don't make so much sense.
