---
title: Tuning for Sustenance
layout: post
tags:
- Open Source
- Business Models
- Licensing
---

Part of making open source software more welcoming to new
folks is making more and more of new folks' choices for
them. Those of us in positions to make choices for others
should be very, very careful which choices we take away, how
we resolve them, and what we leave behind, to be reevaluated
later. Fundamentally, we're social engineering at a pretty
grand scale, well intentioned or not, invited or not. Wisdom
starts to look like hard trade-offs and self-doubt a lot
more often here. Certainty becomes a warning sign. Some
things won't be so easy to fix down the line.

When I look at the defaults we're setting for open source
these days, collectively, I see great cause for concern. I'd
be hard pressed to name a single company, project,
foundation, or personal contribution to the overall picture
that stands out as anything less than well intentioned. But
in the aggregate, I see us entrenching and exacerbating
known problems. Problems we're less confident we can solve.

Don't get me wrong. As a beginner, if instead of making a
choice I don't really understand, I get a sane default made
or compellingly suggested for me, I'm that much more likely
to find my feet and start walking in software. Making hard
choices easier makes open source more accessible. Hiding
error-prone complexity from those liable to trip and fall is
progress. `npm init --yes` gets you The ISC License. The ISC
License isn't wrong. Especially if you didn't know
"license?" would be one of the questions.

But I've noticed that when it comes to community and
collaboration matters---choice of revision control tool,
code host, distribution network, contribution policies,
licenses, and so on---we tend to reach more readily, not
less, for superlatives like "best practices", "the right
way", "the norm", and the like. We imply not only confidence
in the wisdom of our choices, borne of our limited
experience in some relatively small corner of the overall
open source picture, but confidence in their exclusive and
universal _correctness_. Often, that's only as true as our
corner is wide. In reality, what we're doing is convention
over configuration, version 2.0. Convention for how code
gets made, rather than what code does, or how.

Careful, experienced hands choosing conventions can
massively empower greener folk following timidly after them.
To give a personal example, I shudder to think just how much
about SQL data stores I "learned" from DHH's Ruby on Rails
screencasts. Things about data stores those screencasts
seemed to assume I already knew. Things `rails create`
assumed I wanted.

I didn't know much of anything about SQL data stores back
then. If I knew what I wanted, it probably wasn't very good.
Oddly enough, now that I do know a thing or two, I find
myself using SQL data stores less and less often. I went
from using SQL for everything under the sun, because it was
what I knew, or what I felt good about knowing, and part of
package that impressed me, to a more nuanced view. SQL data
stores weren't the "right answer", at least outside of the
Rails mentality. For a time, however, I think SQL data
stores, one chapter in an obscure tome of Rails
conventionality, were good for me, as a programmer.

That's a good open source story, isn't it? Starts in the
middle of nowhere in Texas. Ends today, in the San Francisco
Bay Area, neck deep in the open source community, paying the
bills. One step in front of the other in between.  Having
choices made for me. Making more and more choices on my own.
Revisiting those that were made for me before. Full circle.

Why can't governance, licensing, collaboration, community
expectations, and the rest be part of that kind of story?
Perhaps we should be more careful, less willing to hold the
"best practices" we advocate today out as truly and always
best, more mindful to show our work on them. But why impose
that doubt on newcomers now, before they've had their own
chances to come all the way around?

Because governance decisions, culture decisions, community
decisions, and legal decisions are different.
